---
title: 'eyecite: A tool for parsing legal citations'
tags:
  - law
  - courts
  - Python
authors:
  - name: Jack Cushman
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Matthew Dahl
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Mike Lissner
    affiliation: 3
affiliations:
 - name: Harvard University, Berkman Klein Center
   index: 1
 - name: University of Notre Dame, Department of Political Science
   index: 2
 - name: Free Law Project
   index: 3
date: 7 July 2021
bibliography: paper.bib

---

# Summary

`eyecite` is a Python package for parsing and extracting legal citations from
text. It can recognize a wide variety of citations commonly appearing in American
legal decisions, including:

- full case (e.g., `Bush v. Gore, 531 U.S. 98, 99-100 (2000)`)
- short case (e.g., `531 U.S., at 99`)
- statutory (e.g., `Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 1, ยง 2`)
- law journal (e.g., `1 Minn. L. Rev. 1`)
- supra (e.g., `Bush, supra, at 100`)
- id (e.g., `Id., at 101`)

It also offers tools for efficiently aggregating like citations and annotating
citations with custom markup.

# Statement of need

Citations are the bedrock of legal writing and a frequent topic of legal
research, but few open-source tools exist for extracting them from legal
texts. Because of this, researchers have historically relied on proprietary
citation data provided by vendors like LexisNexis and Westlaw [e.g., @Black2013;
@Fowler2007; @SpriggsII2000] or have used their own personal scripts to parse
such data from texts ad hoc [e.g., @Clark2012; @Fowler2008]. By providing an
open-source, standardized alternative to these approaches, `eyecite` promises
to increase scholarly transparency and consistency. It also promises to give
researchers the extendability and flexibility to develop new methods of
citation analysis that are currently not possible under the prevailing
approaches.

For example, one burgeoning research agenda seeks to apply machine learning
techniques to citation analysis, either to recommend relevant authorities to
legal practitioners [@HoForthcoming], model the topography of the legal search
space [@Dadgostari2021; @Leibon2018], or automatically detect and label
the semantic purpose of citations in texts [@Sadeghian2018]. One obvious
application of `eyecite` would be to use it to generate empirical training
data for these kinds of machine learning tasks.

To facilitate those kinds of projects and more, `eyecite` exposes significant
entity metadata to the user. For case citations, `eyecite` parses and
exposes information regarding a citation's textual position, year, normalized
reporter, normalized court, volume, page, pincite page, and accompanying
parenthetical text, as well as `eyecite`'s best guess at the names of the
plaintiff and defendant of the cited case.  For statutory citations, `eyecite`
parses and exposes information regarding a citation's textual position, year,
normalized reporter, chapter, section, publisher, and accompanying parenthetical
text. It does this using a
[database](https://github.com/freelawproject/reporters-db) of thousands of
regular expressions that have been accumulated and refined over the course of
years of research.

Recognizing that in addition to obtaining comprehensive results, researchers
often want to parse many documents and citations at once, `eyecite` is also
designed with an eye toward performance: it makes use of the Hyperscan library
[@Wang2019] to tokenize and parse its input text in a highly efficient fashion.
Additionally, `eyecite` can heuristically resolve short case, supra, and id
citations to their appropriate full case antecedents, and it integrates well
with custom resolution logic. Finally, for practical applications, it can
"annotate" found citations with custom markup (like HTML links)  and re-insert
that markup into the appropriate place in the original text.

# State of the field

To the best of our knowledge, no open-source software offering the same
functionality as `eyecite` exists. Other similar packages are either no longer
maintained or lack the robust parsing, resolution, or annotation features of
`eyecite` [e.g., @LexNLP; @CiteURL; @Citation]. `eyecite` also benefits from
being used in production by two public data projects, the
[Caselaw Access Project](https://case.law/) and
[CourtListener](https://www.courtlistener.com/), to process and analyze
millions of documents in their collections. From these applications, `eyecite`
has honed a test suite of real-world citation formats. To further minimize
unexpected errors, its codebase enjoys static type checking for all of its
functions. At least one study has already used an earlier version of the data
generated by `eyecite`'s underlying code [@Carmichael2017].


# References
